Keda development guide (#100)
kyma-project/keda-manager: README.md

Taking into account the broader context of Kyma modularization concept, one should realize that Keda Manager's lifecycle is also managed  - by [lifecycle-manager](https://github.com/kyma-project/lifecycle-manager/). Lifecycle manager controlls the lifecycle of various kyma modules via `Kyma` Custom Resource. 

For example: When user enables `keda` module in the Kyma CR in his kyma runtime, the lifecycle manager will  download the bundled package of keda manager and install it. Additionally it will apply a sample Keda CR, which will become the trigger for KEda Manager to start installing of KEDA module itself.

![a](./docs/assets/keda-overview.drawio.svg)

In order to be consumable by lifecycle-manager, keda module (Keda + Keda Manager) has to bundled in a specific way (read more about [module packaging](https://github.com/kyma-project/community/tree/main/concepts/modularization#component-packaging-and-versioning)) and described via special Module Template CR.

##  Development

###  Project structure

Keda manager module was scaffolded with the `kubebuilder`. For more information on `kubebuilder` please visit the project [site](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder)).

> - `config`: A directory containing [kustomize](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kustomize) YAML definitions of the module (for more info visit kubebuilder's documentation of [launch configuration](https://book.kubebuilder.io/cronjob-tutorial/basic-project.html#launch-configuration)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `config`: A directory containing the [kustomize](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kustomize) YAML definitions of the module for more information, see [kubebuilder's documentation on launch configuration](https://book.kubebuilder.io/cronjob-tutorial/basic-project.html#launch-configuration)).
```

> - `api`: Packages containing `Keda` CRD type definitions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `api`: Packages containing Keda CustomResourceDefinitions (CRD). 
```

> - `controllers`: Package containing implementation of module's reconciliation loop that is responsible for managing `Keda` CRs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `controllers`: Package containing the implementation of the module's reconciliation loop responsible for managing Keda CRs.
```

- `Dockerfile`: The definition of the `keda-manager-module` image.
- `bin`: A directory with binaries that are used to build/run project.

> - `config.yaml`: Configuration file to override module's helm chart properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `config.yaml`: Configuration file to override module's Helm chart properties.
```

- `docs`: Contains context documentation for the project.
- `hack`: A directory containing scripts and makefiles that enchance capabilities of root `Makefile`.

> - `pkg`: Contains packages used in project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `pkg`: Contains packages used in the project.
```

- `keda-manager.yaml`: Kubernetes objects that make up the `keda-manager module`

### Prerequisites

> - Access to a k8s cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to a Kubernetes cluster
```

- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)
- [kubebuilder](https://book.kubebuilder.io/)

### How to deploy Keda Manager

> You can build and run just the Keda Manager in the kubernetes cluster (w/o kyma).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can build and run the Keda Manager in the Kubernetes cluster without Kyma.
```

> For the day to day development on your machine you don't always need to have it controlled by Kyma's `lifecycle-manager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the day-to-day development on your machine, you don't always need to have it controlled by Kyma's `lifecycle-manager`.
```

> Run the following commands to deploy Keda Manager on a target k8s cluster (i.e on k3d):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following commands to deploy Keda Manager on a target Kubernetes cluster (i.e., on k3d):
```

1. Clone the project.

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/kyma-project/keda-manager.git && cd keda-manager/
   ```

2. Set the `keda-manager` image name.

   > NOTE: You can use local k3d registry or your dockerhub account to push intermediate images.  
   ```bash
   export IMG=<DOCKER_USERNAME>/custom-keda-manager:0.0.1
   ```

3. Verify the compatibility.

   ```bash
   make test
   ```
4. Build and push the image to the registry.

   ```bash
   make module-image
   ```

> 5. Create a target namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Create a target Namespace.
```

   ```bash
   kubectl create ns kyma-system
   ```

6. Deploy.

   ```bash
   make deploy
   ```

> 7. Verify if keda manager is deployed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Verify if Keda Manager is deployed
```

   ```bash
   kubectl get deployments -n kyma-system       
   NAME                             READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
   operator-keda-manager            1/1     1            1           1m
   ```

> ### How to use Keda Manager to instal Keda

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How to use Keda Manager to install Keda
```

> Keda manager installs KEDA based on watched Keda Custom Resources (CR):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keda manager installs KEDA based on the watched Keda CRs:
```

> - Apply Keda CR (sample) to have Keda installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apply Keda CR (sample) to install Keda.
```

Author: I actually think the passive voice is better here as its not the user uninstalling it, but manager reacting to CR removal

   ```bash
   kubectl apply -f config/samples/operator_v1alpha1_keda_k3d.yaml
   ```

>    This will make keda manager busy and after a while you will have Keda installed and you shall see it's workloads:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   After a while, you will have Keda installed, and you should see its workloads:
```

   ```bash
   NAME                             READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
   operator-keda-manager            1/1     1            1           3m
   keda-manager                     1/1     1            1           3m
   keda-manager-metrics-apiserver   1/1     1            1           3m
   ```

>    Now you can use KEDA to scale workloads on the k8s cluster. Please check the [demo application](docs/keda-demo-application.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Now you can use KEDA to scale workloads on the Kubernetes cluster. Check the [demo application](docs/keda-demo-application.md).
```

> - Remove Keda CR to have Keda uninstalled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remove Keda CR to uninstall Keda.
```

Author: I actually think the passive voice is better here as its not the user uninstalling it, but manager reacting to CR removal

   ```bash
   kubectl delete -f config/samples/operator_v1alpha1_keda_k3d.yaml
   ```

>    This will uninstall all keda workloads but will ofcorse leave the `operator-keda-manager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This uninstalls all Keda workloads but leaves `operator-keda-manager`.
```

>    > **NOTE:** `keda-manager` uses finalizers to uninstall the keda module from the cluster. It means that `keda-manager` will block uninstallation process of KEDA until there are user created custom resources (for example ScaledObjects).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > **NOTE:** Keda Manager uses finalizers to uninstall the Keda module from the cluster. It means that `keda-manager` blocks the uninstallation process of KEDA until there are user-created custom resources (for example ScaledObjects).
```

- Update the specification of Keda CR to change the Keda installation

   [This example](docs/keda-configuration.md) shows how to modify the Keda properties using the `keda.operator.kyma-project.io` CR.

   ```bash
   cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
   apiVersion: operator.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
   kind: Keda
   metadata:
   name: keda-sample
   spec:
   logging:
      operator:
         level: "debug"
   resources:
      operator:
         limits:
         cpu: "1"
         memory: "200Mi"
         requests:
         cpu: "0.5"
         memory: "150Mi"
      metricServer:
         limits:
         cpu: "1"
         memory: "1000Mi"
         requests:
         cpu: "300m"
         memory: "500Mi"
   EOF
   ```

> ## Installation on kyma runtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Installation on Kyma runtime
```

> This section describes the setup of keda module on top of kyma installation with `lifecycle manager`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes the setup of the Keda module on top of the Kyma installation with `lifecycle manager`.
```

> In such setup you dont get to install the keda manager yourself but it is installed and managed by a `lifecycle manager` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In such a setup, you don't need to install Keda Manager, but it is installed and managed by a `lifecycle manager` instead.
```

### Local mode in k3d

When using local k3d cluster you can also use the local oci image registry that comes with it.
Thanks to that you dont need to push the keda module images to a remote registry and test the changes in the kyma installation that is setup entirely on your machine.

Installation steps on local k3d environments are explained in details [here](docs/installation-on-k3d.md).
There is a dedicated `make` target (in the `hack` folder) that does all of them so it is recomended to use it.

1. Clone the project.

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/kyma-project/keda-manager.git && cd keda-manager/
   ```
2. Build the manager locally and run it on the k3d cluster.

   ```bash
   make -C hack/local run
   ```
> **NOTE:** To clean up the k3d cluster, use the `make k3d stop` make target.

### Install on remote kyma runtime

> **Prerequisite:** `lifecycle-manager` should be installed on the cluster (locally) or the cluster itself should be managed remotely by the central control-plane.

> In this section you will learn how to get a PR version of keda module installed by a lifecycle manager on a remote cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, you will learn how to install a PR version of the Keda module by a lifecycle-manager on a remote cluster.
```

Such setup requires OCI images for the keda module version to be built and pushed into a public registry. Also a module template matching the version should be available so that it can be applied on the remote cluster.
CI jobs that are running on PRs and on main branch will help to achieve that.

1. Create a pull request (or use an existing one) in [`keda-manager`](https://github.com/kyma-project/keda-manager) repository,
on PR page scroll to PROW job status list. 

> 2. Click `Details` hyperlink in `pull-keda-module-build` row (make sure job has finished with the success).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Click the `Details` hyperlink in the `pull-keda-module-build` row (make sure the job has finished with success).
```

![a](./docs/assets/pull_keda_module_build.png)

> The module template will be printed in module template section, between the tags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The module template will be printed in the module template section, between the tags.
```

        componentNameMapping: urlPath
        type: ociRegistry
      resources:
      - access:
          digest: sha256:3bf7c3bc2d666165ae2ae6cbcad2e3fcaa3a66ca3afebda8c9d008ab93413453
          type: localOciBlob
        name: keda
        relation: local
        type: helm-chart
        version: 0.0.1-PR-101
      - access:
          digest: sha256:f4a599c4310b0fe9133b67b72d9b15ee96b52a1872132528c83978239b5effef
          type: localOciBlob
        name: config
        relation: local
        type: yaml
        version: 0.0.1-PR-101
      sources:
      - access:
          commit: f3b1b7ed6c175e89a7d29202b8a4cc4fc74cf998
          ref: refs/heads/main
          repoUrl: github.com/kyma-project/keda-manager
          type: github
        name: keda-manager
        type: git
        version: 0.0.1-PR-101
      version: 0.0.1-PR-101
    meta:
      schemaVersion: v2

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~END OF MODULE TEMPLATE~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
make: Leaving directory '/home/prow/go/src/github.com/kyma-project/keda-manager/hack/ci'
```
</details>

Save section's content in local file.

3. Apply module template on remote cluster:

```bash
kubectl apply -f <saved_module_template_path>
```

> 4. Enable `keda-manager` module by patching `kyma` CRD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Enable the Keda Manager module by patching Kyma CRD.
```

### Pipelines running on PR to main merge

| Name | Required | Description |
|------|----------|-------------|
|[`post-keda-manager-operator-build`](https://github.com/kyma-project/test-infra/blob/main/templates/data/generic_module_data.yaml#L158)|true|builds operator's image and pushes it into prod registry|
|[`post-keda-module-build`](https://github.com/kyma-project/test-infra/blob/main/templates/data/generic_module_data.yaml#L80)|true|builds module's OCI image and pushes it to prod artifact registry|
|[`post-main-keda-manager-verify`](https://github.com/kyma-project/test-infra/blob/main/templates/data/generic_module_data.yaml#L193)|true|executes smoke integration test using k3d|

### Building and publishing images manually

- Export required environmental variables

```
export IMG="IMG"           // keda manager's image
export REGISTRY="REGISTRY" // the OCI registry the module will be published to
```

- Run recipe to build and publish module

```
make module-build \
  IMG=${IMG} \
  REGISTRY={REGISTRY}
```

## User inteface

> Keda manager is not only an API extension to Kyma ecosystem but it also extends the UI of the Kyma Dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keda Manager is not only an API extension to the Kyma ecosystem, but it also extends the UI of the Kyma Dashboard.
```

> It uses the [UI extensibility](https://github.com/kyma-project/busola/tree/main/docs/extensibility) feature of kyma dashboard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It uses the [UI extensibility](https://github.com/kyma-project/busola/tree/main/docs/extensibility) feature of Kyma dashboard.
```

> In the [ui-extensions](config/ui-extensions) folder you will find configuration for UI components (i.e list view, form view, details view) that will help kyma users manipulate with Keda CRs - `ScaledObjects`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [ui-extensions](config/ui-extensions) folder you will find configuration for the UI components (i.e., list view, form view, details view) that will help Kyma users manipulate with Keda CRs - `ScaledObjects`.
```

> This configuration is applied as part of keda manager resources. Thanks to that it comes and goes depending on weather Keda module is enabled or disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration is applied as part of the Keda Manager resources. Thanks to that, it comes and goes depending on whether the Keda module is enabled or disabled.
```

## Releasing new versions 

> Release of a new version of Keda Module is realised via [release channels](https://github.com/kyma-project/community/tree/main/concepts/modularization#release-channels).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The release of a new version of the Keda module is realized using the [release channels](https://github.com/kyma-project/community/tree/main/concepts/modularization#release-channels).
```

> This means that new versions are submitted into a given channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that new versions are submitted to a given channel.
```

> Current versions per each channel are represented by Module Templates CR submitted to a matching folder in kyma git repository:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Current versions per each channel are represented by the Module Templates CR submitted to a matching folder in the Kyma git repository:
```

 - [beta](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/main/modules/alpha/moduletemplate-keda.yaml)
 - fast (not available yet)
 - regular (not available yet)

> Heving merged all the changes into main branch in the keda-manager repository, the CI/CD jobs will bundle module images and generate a module template for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having merged all the changes into the main branch in the `keda-manager` repository, the CI/CD jobs will bundle module images and generate a module template for you.
```

> Take the module template and submit it into the desired channel via pull request to kyma repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take the module template and submit it into the desired channel using a pull request to the Kyma repository.
```

> A series of governence jobs will start testing if the new candidate version fulfils the criteria described in the [module submission process](https://github.com/kyma-project/community/tree/main/concepts/modularization#module-submission-process)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A series of governance jobs will start testing if the new candidate version fulfills the criteria described in the [module submission process](https://github.com/kyma-project/community/tree/main/concepts/modularization#module-submission-process).
```

## Keda module footprint

> This section describes the impact the installed keda module has on the cluster resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes the impact the installed Keda module has on the cluster resources.
```
